add RFC for enabling Standby Nodes handle READ Requests (#1553)
openbao/openbao: website/content/docs/rfcs/standby-nodes-handle-read-requests.mdx

---
sidebar_label: Standby nodes handle read requests
description: |-
  An OpenBao RFC to enable standby nodes to handle read requests directly.
---

# Standby Nodes Handle Read Requests

### Summary

This RFC proposes enhancing standby nodes in HA setup to handle read requests directly, eliminating the current bottleneck where all requests must be processed by the single active leader node. This represents the first step toward horizontal read scalability in OpenBao.

**Key Approach**: Simplify the architecture by making **all standby nodes capable of serving read requests by default**, rather than maintaining separate **performance standby** vs **regular standby** node types. This unified approach reduces complexity while providing horizontal read scaling.

### Problem Statement

### Current Architecture Limitation

OpenBao currently operates with a strict active-passive HA model:
- **Active Node**: Handles all read and write requests.
- **Standby Nodes**: Forward all requests to the active node.

> Following a successful `unseal`, a **standby node’s** primary responsibility is to maintain a fully **consistent replica** of the **active node’s** state by continuously applying the active node’s *write-ahead log* in near real-time. This guarantees up-to-date data replication and enables a rapid Recovery Time Objective (RTO) in the event of failover. However, this architecture results in pronounced **resource underutilization**. While the system continually invests in I/O operations for persistent storage and consumes network bandwidth to synchronize all state changes, the standby node’s compute resources remain largely idle. There is a clear opportunity to enhance overall cluster efficiency by allowing standby nodes to perform read requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following a successful `unseal`, a **standby node’s** primary responsibility is to maintain a fully **consistent replica** of the **active node’s** state and continuously monitoring for failure of the active node in order to take over. The underlying storage engine (Raft in the case of Integrated Storage or PostgreSQL's native replication) is responsible for ensuring data replication between nodes. This enables a rapid Recovery Time Objective (RTO) in the event of failover. However, this architecture results in pronounced **resource underutilization**. While the system continually invests in I/O operations for persistent storage and consumes network bandwidth to synchronize all state changes, the standby node’s compute resources remain largely idle. There is a clear opportunity to enhance overall cluster efficiency by allowing standby nodes to perform read requests.
```

### Technical Description

### Core Components Involved

1. **`vault/ha.go`**: Manages standby state and leader election
2. **`vault/core.go`**: postUnseal is invoked on the active node, and performance standby nodes.
3. **`http/handler.go`**: Contains `handleRequestForwarding()` middleware
4. **`vault/request_handling.go`**: Core request processing logic
5. **`sdk/framework/backend.go`**: Plugin-level forwarding decisions

**Single Leader Model**: 
`vault/ha.go` establishes a single-leader architecture. Functions like `Core.Leader` and `Core.LeaderLocked` are responsible for identifying the current leader.
Standby nodes (managed by `runStandby()` and `waitForLeadership()` in `vault/ha.go`) periodically check for leader changes and attempt to acquire a distributed lock (`acquireLock()`) to become the new leader if the current one fails.
All write operations are directed to this single leader. If a request arrives at a standby node, `vault/ha.go`'s logic will redirect it to the active leader.
In `vault/ha.go`: Functions `Core.Standby()` and `Core.StandbyStates()` return if core is in standby mode and what is a state of standby node.

> ```

Reviewer: This could be a mermaid diagram instead if you wish :-)

> Sealed Node → Unseal → Standby Node → [Waits for Leadership] → Active Node

Reviewer: @suprjinx I think the active vs standby terminology mirrors Vault. They have Performance {X} Standby nodes which are essentially equivalent to this one (minus the `{X}` -- the Performance Primary cluster vs one of many Performance Secondary clusters, each of which has a single "Active" and many "Standby" nodes, where the Performance Secondary Active node can write to cluster-local storage and only the Performance Primary Active node can write to _all_ storage).

My hesitancy around primary/secondary is that Vault's Performance Primary/Performance Second multi-clustering semantics is _not_ what we're adding.

Clearly these terms are very overloaded though. Perhaps writer/reader distinction? But there were already confusion in this draft from @driif around that term w.r.t. HTTP verbs (not impacted -- any HTTP request type can incur storage writes theoretically) versus at the actual storage layer.

> Sealed Node → Unseal → Standby Node → [Waits for Leadership] → Active Node

Reviewer 2: > Clearly these terms are very overloaded though. Perhaps writer/reader distinction? But there were already confusion in this draft from @driif around that term w.r.t. HTTP verbs (not impacted -- any HTTP request type can incur storage writes theoretically) versus at the actual storage layer.

Agree that "writer/reader" is the true distinction now, although "writer" is also the elected leader of the cluster. "Read nodes", and "the writer-leader node". 🤔

> Sealed Node → Unseal → Standby Node → [Waits for Leadership] → Active Node

Reviewer: @suprjinx Yeah, hm... Maybe Active/Replica would be the best?

> Sealed Node → Unseal → Standby Node → [Waits for Leadership] → Active Node

Author: @cipherboy @suprjinx I agree—from a terminology perspective, if standby nodes can handle read requests, they're not really "standby" anymore. However, since most of the code is already in place and the main goal of this RFC was to let standby nodes handle reads, changing the terminology now would mean a major refactor. I think a bigger terminology update should be discussed separately, maybe in another RFC focused on a larger refactor.

The methods `fsm.Snapshot()` and `fsm.Restore()` manage state snapshots. Snapshots help with log compaction and allow new or lagging nodes to catch up without replaying the entire log history.
  - `logical.ErrStandbyPleaseForward` - For forwarding requests to leader
  - **Remove**: `logical.ErrPerfStandbyPleaseForward` (no longer needed with unified approach)
- **Forwarding Logic**: 
  - Mature RPC-based request forwarding in `http/handler.go`
  - Can be simplified by removing performance standby special cases
- **State Management**: 
  - `core.Standby()`, `core.StandbyStates()` for node state tracking
  - **Simplify**: Remove `core.PerfStandby()` complexity
- **Configuration**: 
  - **Remove**: `disable_performance_standby` (no longer relevant)

Any request received by a non-active node is forwarded to the active node. This is managed by `handleRequestForwarding` middleware in `http/handler.go`, which checks if the node is the leader and forwards the request if it is not.

**Enhanced Forwarding Logic**: 

> Forwarding should first depend on the request method. If it's write request → forward. If read request → check if standby can serve reads and handle locally. All other logic stays the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Forwarding should depend on the error message returned from invoking the request. On standby nodes, a storage shim will ensure that the underlying storage is not written to, instead returning `logical.ErrReadOnly`. When a storage write occurs, this middleware will not return the error to the caller but instead invoke request forwarding.
```

Author: @cipherboy Shouldn't we first check if the request method is POST, PUT, or DELETE? If so, we can just redirect right away without doing anything else.

If it's a GET or LIST request but we still try to write to storage, we can check for `logical.ErrReadOnly` and then forward it.

in `http/handler.go`:

> forwarding should first depend on request method, if it's write request and not leader - forward. If read request - try to serve.

Reviewer: As above.

```
func handleRequestForwarding(core *vault.Core, handler http.Handler) http.Handler {
	return http.HandlerFunc(func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {

		isLeader, leaderAddr, _, err := core.Leader()
		if err != nil {
			if err == vault.ErrHANotEnabled {
				// Standalone node, serve request normally
				handler.ServeHTTP(w, r)
				return
			}
			// Some internal error occurred
			respondError(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err)
			return
		}

		if isWriteRequest(r) && !isLeader {
			if leaderAddr == "" {
				respondError(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, errors.New("local node not active but active cluster node not found"))
				return
			}

			forwardRequest(core, w, r)
			return
		}

		handler.ServeHTTP(w, r)
	})
}

func isWriteRequest(r *http.Request) bool {
	switch r.Method {
	case "POST", "PUT", "DELETE":
		return true
	default:
		return false
	}
}
```

Read Request - doesn't mean, that we are not writing to storage! 

> If the logical backend attempts to write to storage, the storage layer, being in read-only state, returns `logical.ErrReadOnly`. On standby nodes, this error should be translated to `logical.ErrStandbyPleaseForward`.

Reviewer: Right, this should be the only error. I don't necessarily think we need to translate the ErrReadOnly to the latter; both should result in a forward and mean different things / come from different layers.
